# Setting the Stage for Bitcoin

The internet was created and developed out of US government research starting in the 1960s. The Department of Defense first established ARPANET in 1969, and throughout the next few decades, the building blocks of what we now know as the Internet were laid. Over time, protocols like TCP/IP were put into place to ensure that all network participants could communicate to each other and understand one another. At the time, privacy was not a concern - it was simply a means of transporting information. In fact, with computer networks it is necessary to provide an endpoint to ensure that the data is sent there. That's how the TCP/IP protocol works - by sending packets of information across the network to arrive at the correct destination, noted by a unique IP address. This is a clear oversimplification of the protocol, but it is enough for the scope of this paper.

The publication of asymmetric encryption in _New Directions in Cryptography_ by Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellmann in 1976 unleashed a wave of libertarian energy around the power of the internet. Previously, crypts – from the Greek word for _hidden_ – had relied upon a single key to both encrypt and decrypt. This is true for digital, computer-based crypts as well as analog crypts used for millenia. This is a limitation to hiding information as the password must also be transmitted. For example, if I encrypt a computer file with my password, you would need to know this password. If I could give you the password in secret, I could just give you the secret itself. Transporting the secret key is a major security risk.

Where asymmetric encryption differs is that there are two keys, a public and a private. As their names suggest, the public key is like a public identifier that your contacts can use to identify you. The private key, associated to the public key through highly complex math that can only be done in one direction, thereby eliminating the possibility to reverse engineer the private from the public, is used as a sort of digital proof that you hold the key associated with that public key. Like a magic signature that proves you are the owner of the public key. So, the process goes as follows: Alice wants to send Bob a secret message. Bob will give Alice his public key, which can be shared openly, and Alice will encrypt the message using her private key and Bob's public key. Bob, since he holds the private key for his public key, is the only one who can decrypt that message. Neither the email server nor anyone snooping in on the network traffic would be able to decrypt and read the message.

Amazingly, as a side note, in 1997 the British GCHQ published declassified studies that showed they had conceptualized and tested a similar model (the work of James H. Ellis, Clifford Cocks, and Malcolm J. Williamson) of asymmetric cryptography for military uses in 1970.<sup>1,2</sup>

Keep in mind, in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the main computer users were those who enjoy being on the bleeding edge of new technologies, and academics. These were highly capable technical people who were deftly aware of the capabilities of the computers they were using, as computers and the internet required immense technical knowledge to connect to. These people understood how computer networks worked, as well as understanding the vast potential of these great new machines, and so they were acute to the ability of these tools to enhance personal abilities and freedoms while also having the potential to track each aspect of a person's online life.

That said, asymmetric encryption at this point was still just an idea. It could work, sure, but it was not in any condition to be used by a mass network of users with differing levels of technical competence and mathematical abilities. Nonetheless, the advancement of asymmetric encryption excited the imagination of the first generation of libertarian-minded internet users who sought a free and open "libertaria"<sup>3</sup> that could not exist in the physical world.

Asymmetric encryption had the potential to upturn the existing power structure of the internet at the time and allow users to reassert their privacy by hiding their information even from those who provide the infrastructure on which to send it. This fact was not lost on early internet users. In fact, one of the very first messages ever posted to the _Cypherpunk_ mailing list (which we will look at in depth) by Russell Whitaker was a speech by Chuck Hammill, equating the invention of the crossbow with the invention of asymmetric encryption.

Chuck argues that the crossbow was a fascinating invention in its time because it eliminated the massive power imbalance between individual and state by providing a cheap, easy-to-use weapon that would be just as effective against the state as any physical weapon the state could wield against the individual. Avoiding the debate on whether this is actually true (I make no claim either way as it is well beyond the scope of the paper to analyze that), the parallels are drawn to encryption because although governments and corporations may have more resources to throw at control and surveillance, the use of encryption is a means of levelling the playing field and ensuring that they cannot take whatever information they please.

You can see the engineering, technological mindset from Mr. Hammill as he argues:

> If you look at history... it has been dramatically shaped by men with names like Washington, Lincoln, Nixon, Marcos, Duvalier, Khadaffi, and their ilk. But it has also been shaped by people with names like Edison, Curie, Marconi, Tesla, and Wozniak. And this latter shaping has been at least as pervasive, and not nearly so bloody.

-- Chuck Hamill, _FROM CROSSBOWS TO CRYPTOGRAPHY: THWARTING THE STATE VIA TECHNOLOGY_

He finishes his speech with a call to action - a call for people who care about their freedoms to do something about it. In this, we see one of the earliest traits of the cypherpunk community in the "do-it-yourself" ethos. Hammill said, "Rather than beseeching the state to please not enslave, plunder or constrain us, I propose a libertarian network spreading the technologies by which we may seize freedom for ourselves... There exist ways to make yourself free".

At the point of Chuck Hammill's speech in 1988, the cypherpunks were not yet a mailing list and the term _cypherpunk_ did not yet exist. It would still be some years. The next building block that needed to fall into place was Timothy May's Crypto Anarchist Manifesto. It was here that the groundwork for the basic beliefs of the cypherpunk community were laid bare. It isn't long or particularly complex - it is straight to the point and confident in its tone. He talks of "both a social and economic revolution" and how the technology (referencing asymmetric encryption) already exists in theory. He predicted that the state will "of course try to slow or halt the spread of this technology, citing national security concerns, use of the technology by drug dealers and tax evaders, and fears of societal disintegration".<sup>4</sup>

Considering the information Edward Snowden provided in 2012-2013, and the discussions around surveillance that followed, this mentality by the state persists. Those words should resonate with Bitcoin believers, especially early adopters before it hit "mainstream", as it was expected most people who had heard of Bitcoin would associate it with purchasing drugs and other unsavoury, illegal items and services, no matter how much evidence suggested that drugs were not a particularly popular (nor smart) use-case for Bitcoin. May finishes his speech by comparing encryption to the inventions of printing and barbed wire fences in the way that they upturn existing power structures and provide protection to individuals.

In 1991, Phil Zimmerman released the second version of his implementation of asymmetric encryption designed to make it easier for users to use the technology. His system is called _Pretty Good Privacy_ (PGP) and is still active today. The second version - version 2.0 - is when it really hit the right user experience and simplicity required for the average user at the time (who was surely significantly more technically knowledgeable than the average internet user today) to figure out. This seemed to be the final piece of the puzzle for the cypherpunk group to come together. The first ingredient was the invention of the internet itself; the second was the invention of asymmetric encryption; the third was the implementation of a way to do asymmetric encryption easily for end-users, PGP 2.0 in 1991.

There were many other ancillary pieces that contributed to the motivation, dedication, and determination of the group's members. As predicted by Timothy May in _The Crypto Anarchist Manifesto_, the US government outlawed the transfer of cryptography software across borders. In fact, Phil Zimmerman was himself charged in 1993 for exporting a copy of the code across the United States border.

Instead of complaining and giving up, he fought. His response was to print the code into a book, because books were protected by the First Amendment (the right to free speech). As a result, the code could then be exported in a book and copied verbatim onto another machine. Problem solved for Phil. Other cypherpunks, one of whom will feature prominently across many sections in this book, Adam Back, similarly concocted elaborate, humorous schemes to transport the code including printing it on t-shirts and wearing it through airports, or even coffee mugs. Yes, these are funny anecdotes, but they also show first-hand the true mentality of the cypherpunks: fight back for yourself and stand up for your rights.<sup>5</sup>

1993 was a year in which the United States government decided to take a firm stance on citizens' rights to encryption technologies. That year, the US government released the _Clipper Program_. On April 16, 1993, the Press Secretary of the White House released a statement outlining this new program: "A state-of-the-art microcircuit called the Clipper Chip has been developed by government engineers" which would enforce encryption standards on telecommunication networks but would also have the ability for government and law enforcement agencies to decrypt the information if need be.<sup>6</sup> Of course, those who study cryptography understand that any encryption practice that has a built-in "backdoor" - which is what the government was proposing - is inherently weak and is only a matter of time until it is exploited by someone, whether it is the government doing unlawful surveillance or falling into the hands of an attacker or criminal to be used for nefarious purposes.

The repercussions are great, nonetheless. Matt Blaze, an academic researcher in cryptography and trust management systems, managed to break the Clipper encryption algorithm which led the government to eventually back down.<sup>7</sup> Matt Blaze often still tweets on Bitcoin and blockchain technology, though perhaps surprisingly he is not as optimistic as most and often criticizes how people implement blockchains. His criticisms and comments are beyond the scope of this paper but are interesting and worth considering.

The late 1980s and early 1990s were a hotbed for internet technology development and privacy protocols. It's not hard to see why. The internet was young, its users were technically savvy and forward-thinking with incredible insight, there was public debate around digital freedom and encryption, and the tools were just being developed and released. There was also a revival of the "small-government" libertarian mindset from Ronald Reagan's presidency, although it is difficult to say how much of an influence that was. Certainly, a high number of cypherpunk mailing list members profess to be libertarians, however the list was far more politically diverse than that and even still, most of the political statements made do not fit neatly into either category. There is a wealth of fascinating discussions in the mailing list records, and the foresight many of the participants show is uncanny.

<sup>1</sup> According to a _Wired Magazine_ article, [retrieved from wired.com here.](https://www.wired.com/1999/04/crypto/)  
<sup>2</sup> Info taken from GCHQ government site dedicated to James Ellis, [retrieved from here.](https://www.gchq.gov.uk/person/james-ellis)  
<sup>3</sup> _Libertaria_ is a term used by Timothy May to describe his vision for the free internet. [See more here.](https://www.activism.net/cypherpunk/libertaria.html)  
<sup>4</sup> This source informed the preceeding paragraphs. Content taken from the _Cypherpunk_ mailing list archives on cryptonarchy.wiki, [retreived from here.](https://mailing-list-archive.cryptoanarchy.wiki/archive/1992/09/b5e24ee5d6a00a60a5cdd485ad3b67fa4016296e3d5df8faa2c6181e88494b20/)  
<sup>5</sup> _Burdens of Proof: Cryptographic Culture and Evidence Law in the Age of Electronic Documents_, Jean-Francois Blanchette, 2012 (pg. 49, pg. 191)  
<sup>6</sup> April 16, 1993 statement from the White House Press Secretary. [Retrieved from the EPIC archive.](https://archive.epic.org/crypto/clipper/white_house_statement_4_93.html)  
<sup>7</sup> Research paper from AT&T Bell Laboratories: _Protocol Failure in the Escrowed Encryption Standard_, Matt Blaze, 1994. [Retrieved from Matt Blaze's personal blog.](https://www.mattblaze.org/papers/eesproto.pdf)  
