# The Cypherpunks

The Cypherpunks were mentioned a few times in the previous section. The Cypherpunk group plays a key role in the early discourse around digital currencies, decentralization, and human rights on the Internet in general. Understanding the development of the Cypherpunks is instrumental to understanding the quest for decentralized digital currencies.

Cypherpunks, first and foremost, were a group of people associated by an email list, with like-minded interests in the internet, privacy and encryption, and general freedom and libertarian tendencies offline. Of course, the group was not politically or ideologically homogenous, but it can be assumed that they majority of members had some level of belief in the listed concepts.

The stage had been set through the development of the internet, publication and popularization of encryption tools, and the political climate of the time. Certainly, the cypherpunk mentality existed prior to the name or the mailing list itself, as seen in Timothy May's _Crypto Anarchist Manifesto_. There was also the (still-active) mailing list, Extropians, that discussed technology and science-fiction that many of the earliest members of the Cypherpunk list belonged to as well.<sup>1</sup>

The term _cypherpunk_ was coined by Jude Millhon, also known as St. Jude in the hacking underground. Jude was widely known and respected in these circles. She was editor-in-chief at Mondo2000, a cutting-edge publication that discussed internet, privacy, and general cyberpunk subculture. Cyberpunk is a genre of science-fiction that often takes place in futuristic, technological dystopias. Think of the Blade movies or the Matrix. At the time, Jude was dating a man named Eric Hughes, who was friends with Tim May and very much a cypherpunk, even if the term had not yet existed. In talking about the proposed group and mailing list, Jude laughed and said, "You guys are just a bunch of cypherpunks", playing on the term cyberpunk.<sup>2</sup> Tim May once said that at first, he did not like the name - he said he never considered himself much of a punk. But he liked the message it conveyed about their anti-authority, freedom-loving nature. The name stuck.

May, of course, plays a prominent role in the development of the Cypherpunk mailing list and groups. He and John Gilmore organized the first Cypherpunks meeting in September 1992 at Gilmore's company office, Cygnus Solutions, along with Eric Hughes. This marked the official beginning of the Cypherpunk mailing list and movement. At the meetup the group, of which there were about 20 people, played what May calls The Crypto Anarchy Game. He says, "The goal... is to make concrete the various strange ideas associated with the vision of digital economies, anonymous transfers, reputations, and so on."

Here's how to play: Eric Hughes and Tim May prepare fake money, envelopes, and so on. Participants play various roles, assigned randomly. Some were drug dealers, some were CIA Counterintelligence agents looking for moles and information brokers. Valuable, secret information was also distributed. Various publicly visible transaction regions existed. Remailers were simulated by envelopes within envelopes, with each remailer choosing his postage, latency, etc. There were some interesting findings. Namely, there was lots of chaos and confusion. In fact, lots of messages were lost as humans are quite fallible and don't run complicated protocols very well. At least according to Tim. Tim and Eric, while they had fun, did not really try and improve the game much after the first few meetups. He argued that most of the participants who have adequate technical base knowledge would also be in line with their thinking, so it would not really sell anyone on the value of cryptography itself. "The really interesting stuff - digital money, DC-Nets, etc. - is too abstract for most people, anyway."<sup>3</sup>

By late September 1992, the mailing list had been fully set up at cypherpunks@toad.com. The domain was provided by John Gilmore, Hugh Daniel set up and maintained the mail server, and Eric Hughes maintained the list and took the lead on starting the group. That first September is mostly people testing out the list and sharing news, and some jokes. One of the first posts was a copy of Chuck Hammill's 1988 speech equating the invention of the crossbow to the invention of asymmetric encryption that we discussed in the previous section.

There were also lots of conversations regarding how to make the mailing list more anonymous and encrypted using PGP, and discussions around code quality and the like. Some things never change amongst hackers and software developers. We can see in these discussions a lot of the same concerns that we will see when discussing Bitcoin - concerns over central servers as single points of failure, for example, which was a main concern of Satoshi Nakamoto in their Bitcoin design.

Cypherpunks believe in personal freedom and personal autonomy. This means that the individual is responsible for protecting themselves. Jude posted this quote from Alan Watts to the group in late 1992: "The alternative to mutual trust, which is indeed a risky gamble, is the security of the police state".<sup>4</sup>

An interesting debate arose after the second in-person meetup in October 1992. The group again played The Crypto Anarchy Game, only this time they used the acquisition of drugs as their test case. The debate had nothing to do with whether or not drugs should be legalized - in fact, most members seemed to assume that everyone agreed with one another regarding their disapproval of drug prohibition. Instead, the debate centered around whether an MIS Manager at a company would consider using email encryption more if it were associated with "freedom and privacy and not the guys on the corner who want to sell your kid crack."<sup>5</sup>

Remember the government's statement in the Clipper Program press release: "While encryption technology can help Americans protect business secrets and the unauthorized release of personal information, it also can be used by terrorists, drug dealers, and other criminals." The early Cypherpunks were acutely aware that technology must be marketed to people, and they understood each side of the debate and that people may lean towards safety if they do not know any better.<sup>6</sup>

The foresight evident in these discussions is astounding. No matter if you like what they say or hate it, the fact that there were people in 1992 who were thinking and discussing topics that the rest of us would only grapple with in the second decade of the 21st century is incredible. Discussions were had around futuristic hacking techniques like wireless sniffing, airgaps, and even hacking through AC power. They talk at length of how to ensure the integrity of your cryptography, and how to improve PGP in that way. One oft talked about topic was the creation of a GUI interface for PGP on the Mac. This shows the effects that PGP 2.0 had in empowering and inspiring this group and shows how the group gave back to the community by building and spreading awareness.<sup>7</sup>

While the Cypherpunks worry about many things beyond just digital money, the potential to use cryptography to achieve some sort of digital cash system was hugely understood, if not yet applicable at that time. It also fell in line perfectly with their ideas of libertarianism and censorship-resistance, especially on the internet. How could you have true freedom if a single, trusted entity controls your money? This awareness is largely due to David Chaum's 1982 dissertation Computer Systems Established, Maintained, and Trusted by Mutually Suspicious Groups that first discussed it, while laying a foundation for digital cash using asymmetric encryption.

Interestingly, on November 24, 1992, Tim May argues that he believes the crackdown on cryptography is potentially a part of a larger movement to protect and promote digital cash issued by governments and banks. He then forwarded a message he sent to the Extropians list titled, _Scenario for a ban on cash transactions_. 25 years later, we saw this exact thing happen in one of the world's most populous countries, India. Tim May does not necessarily take credit for the idea, saying that "cashless society" discussions come up periodically. He ends by saying: "Make no mistake, a government-run cashless society will be worse than Orwell's worst".<sup>8</sup> His words could have been written by Satoshi. In the 2020s, we now hear of “Central Bank Digital Currencies” (CBDCs), which have the same Orwellian surveillance effect.

Tim May and Duncan Frissell had a back-and-forth debate over the intricacies of decentralization and digital money which discussed many of the problems Satoshi sought to solve.<sup>9</sup> They also bring up the need for zero-knowledge proofs for better privacy. Again, the foresight is incredible as we are only now seeing the production implementation of zero-knowledge proofs with Zcash and ZK rollups on Ethereum.

A few other interesting things occurred in the early days of the Cypherpunks. For one, we see Hal Finney become very active in the group. Hal Finney will be a key player later as a development and testing partner to Satoshi in the earliest days of the Bitcoin network and the first to receive a transaction (from Satoshi).<sup>10</sup> On October 17, 1992, Lloyd Blankenship of Steve Jackson Games, a California video game development firm, made his first post on the mailing list to discuss the formation of the EFF, his lawsuit against the Secret Service, and some of the cryptographic things he's doing and working on.<sup>11</sup> Eric Hughes predicted the use of a physical card that holds and secures your private cryptography keys. This is exactly like a Smart Card, Yubikey or bitcoin hardware wallet today. Eric also discussed the trade-off between security and ease-of-use by arguing that "Perfect security is not worth the cost when the marginal cost of perfect security is more than the marginal benefits of such security... Cryptography is all economics."<sup>12</sup> Again, the foresight is clear. End-user cryptography was largely dormant until cryptocurrencies arrived on the scene – all cryptography is economics.

In the winter of 1993, Eric Hughes decided to lay bare his beliefs in _A Cypherpunk's Manifesto_, which was the cypherpunk adaptation of Tim May's _The Cryptoanarchist's Manifesto_. Notice it is "A" manifesto, instead of "the" manifesto. That is because there is no authoritative entity in charge. The Cypherpunks were a group organized by anarchy. If you want to do something, do it. If other people find value in it, they will help. If not, and you still believe there is value in it, more power to you. There are no prescribed definitions of Cypherpunk, except for that which its members come up with on their own. Ultimately, the Cypherpunk beliefs are very general regarding privacy, freedom, and the belief that if people want those two concepts, they must work to achieve them for themselves.

The manifesto begins by proclaiming that privacy is a necessary feature in an electronic age within a free society. He weaves the notion of discussions together with the notion of transactions: that is, any communication is a transaction between two or more parties, and all transactions between these parties should have the ability to be selectively revealed if and only if the participants want to reveal it. He then proceeds to argue that one cannot expect any "large, faceless organizations" like governments and corporations to grant people privacy; privacy must be sought after and implemented by the people themselves.

“We the Cypherpunks are dedicated to building anonymous systems. We are defending our privacy with cryptography, with anonymous mail forwarding systems, with digital signatures, and with digital money.”

-- Eric Hughes, _A Cypherpunk's Manifesto_.

As seen in the quote above, Hughes and his earliest Cypherpunk comrades believe that financial freedom and privacy is innately connected to the broader notion of freedom and privacy in general society. To the Cypherpunks, economic transactions are just as, if not more important than social transactions (i.e., speech). For one cannot be free socially if they are not free economically. This feels even more true as our world doubles down on debt-based economics in the aftermath of the financial collapse of 2008-2009 and now the COVID pandemic and subsequent lockdowns.

The next paragraph contains the strongest statement of what a Cypherpunk actually does: "Cypherpunks write code".<sup>13</sup> Again, as noted above, the Cypherpunk group were not political activists in the sense of lobbying and protest; rather, they were political activists in the sense of developing new tools so that they would not have to lobby and protest. They could simply use the new tools to upturn the existing power dynamics.

The "do-it-yourself" ethos is still very alive in the Bitcoin community today, and the voluntaryism and lack of permission-asking by Satoshi Nakamoto when developing Bitcoin shows that Satoshi was very much a Cypherpunk, at least in spirit. They built a system that was resistant to virtually every kind of attack and would exist so long as even a small number of people found it useful. Bitcoin, for that reason, will never go to $0 even if the US government "outlawed it", because people like Satoshi do not need anyone's permission to continue using it. Even in the case of a fatal flaw, a voluntary network of users could continue to run the blockchain from a fully operational point in time. Eric has also spoken these words directly to the mailing list: "There's plenty of work to do. Look around. If no one else is doing this, you should."<sup>14</sup>

Eric ends his manifesto by arguing against any regulation on cryptography and calling for people to work together to inform others and build systems and tools for enhancing personal privacy and freedom in an electronic age.

The focus on the Cypherpunks may give the impression that Satoshi belonged to the group (in the very contained sense of being part of the mailing list). There is no evidence that Satoshi was on the mailing list, other than the fact that so many of the discussions, debates, ideas, and theories were present in Satoshi's design of a decentralized digital cash system. The purpose of this section is to show the continuous, ongoing development of the underpinnings of what would one day become Bitcoin.

<sup>1</sup> As evidenced by Timothy May's citations in _Crypto Anarchy and Virtual Communities_ in 1994. [Retrieved from mit.edu here.](https://groups.csail.mit.edu/mac/classes/6.805/articles/crypto/cypherpunks/may-virtual-comm.html)  
<sup>2</sup> From Rosie Cross' 1995 feature of Jude Millhon, titled _Modem Grrrl_ and dated 02/01/1995. [Retrieved from wired.com archive here.](https://www.wired.com/1995/02/st-jude/)  
<sup>3</sup> Taken from Tim May's Cyphernomicon, [retrieved from archive.org here.](https://ia600208.us.archive.org/10/items/cyphernomicon/cyphernomicon.txt)  
<sup>4</sup> From Jude Millhon's email to the _Cypherpunks_ mailing list on September 25, 1992, which began with this quote. [Retrieved from the nettime.org mailing list archive here.](https://nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-0101/msg00161.html)  
<sup>5</sup> From Cyphernomicon (see citation 3).
<sup>6</sup> April 16, 1993 statement from the White House Press Secretary. [Retrieved from the EPIC archive.](https://archive.epic.org/crypto/clipper/white_house_statement_4_93.html)  
<sup>7</sup> See the _Cypherpunks_ mailing list archive from 1992. [Available at cryptoanarchy.wiki.](https://mailing-list-archive.cryptoanarchy.wiki/)  
<sup>8</sup> From Tim May's November 24, 1992 email to the _Cypherpunks_ email list, _Scenario for a Ban on Cash Transactions_. [Retrieved from cryptoanarchy.wiki archive.](https://mailing-list-archive.cryptoanarchy.wiki/archive/1992/11/072cd11b2499e62e64050cdeb80730782b5643b03534646e2adae32d37744dd6/).  
<sup>9</sup> See the email exchanges following Tim May's November 24, 1992 email cited above (citation 8).  
<sup>10</sup> _The First Bitcoin Transaction Was Sent to Hal Finney 12 Years Ago_, Shaurya Malwa, January 12, 2021.  
<sup>11</sup> Loyd Blankenship, _Intro & Keystone_, October 17, 1992. [Retrieved from cryptoanarchy.wiki archive.](https://mailing-list-archive.cryptoanarchy.wiki/archive/1992/10/bfb3ed37d92a8d3b2b0087d4c8b9ae40db038981b9f15d89ec0bcbd2e2e7ed6d/)  
<sup>12</sup> Eric Hughes email sent to _Cypherpunks_ mailing list on October 17, 1992, titled _one time pads_. [Retrieved from cryptoanarchy.wiki archive.](https://mailing-list-archive.cryptoanarchy.wiki/archive/1992/10/0e036f820010a6582fb94869cd94a029bdb96479d0b1088f2cf4b213f7bfe1ad/)  
<sup>13</sup> _A Cypherpunk's Manifesto_, Eric Hughes, March 9, 1993. [Retrieved from activist.net archive.](https://www.activism.net/cypherpunk/manifesto.html).  
<sup>14</sup> Eric Hughes to _Cypherpunks_ mailing list, October 17, 1992. [Retrieved from cpunks.org archive.](https://lists.cpunks.org/pipermail/cypherpunks-legacy/1992-October.txt#:~:text=doing%20this%2C%20you-,should,-.%0A%0A%3EIdeally%2C%20you%20would)  
