# Early Digital Currencies

There are a wealth of fascinating, forward-thinking discussions and debates in the Cypherpunk mailing list throughout the 1990s. Unfortunately, to highlight them all will go beyond the scope of the history of Bitcoin, though perhaps in the future a more elaborate book on the Cypherpunks will be warranted. Certainly, there is no shortage of topics discussed that are perhaps more relevant today than ever before - anonymity, tracking, encryption debates, spam, misinformation and fake news, and more. That said, digital currency was always heralded as some sort of holy grail for the Cypherpunk group and was one of the founding focuses of the group.

People who follow and hold cryptocurrencies may be surprised to hear that Satoshi Nakamoto did not release the Bitcoin whitepaper like some sort of immaculate conception, by which they created some novel, magical technology from nothing. In fact, the brilliance of Satoshi Nakamoto is the building upon and packaging of many previous attempts at creating digital currencies, with an acute understanding of how and why they failed.

Bitcoin cannot be separated from these previous attempts, and Satoshi does not try to. Certainly, many of the very interesting schemes and proposals that we are about to analyze were cited by Satoshi in the Bitcoin whitepaper in the fashion of an academic paper. The collection of research Satoshi Nakamoto built upon was largely shared on the Cypherpunk mailing list, leading many to believe that whoever Satoshi is, they were almost certainly a member of the mailing list. Indeed, members of the Cypherpunk mailing list included Adam Back, CEO of Blockstream and the creator of _hashcash_, and Hal Finney, creator of the concept of reusable proof of work, which builds upon hashcash and is central to the mining process in Bitcoin. Both Adam Back and Hal Finney play prominent roles in the development of Bitcoin itself at different stages.

In an interview with cointelegram.com, Adam Back said, "if he was on the Cypherpunks list, Satoshi wouldn’t be the only 'anonymous' on these lists nor even the only one trying to launch a paper about virtual money. There were many anonymous and pseudonymous people discussing topics on the Cypherpunk lists, including the e-cash topic."<sup>1</sup>

The following building blocks of Bitcoin do not include all attempts at digital currency in the broader sense. I will not include systems like PayPal or Flooz, since they are centralized, are not cryptographic in nature and seek to solve a different problem than Satoshi Nakamoto sought. In any case, these are more akin to digital delivery mechanisms and not unique currencies themselves.

The following sections will cover previous attempts and proposals for digital currencies, or components of digital currency systems and currency-like functionalities that are important to note in the story of Bitcoin.

## Digicash

Digicash was a company and digital currency founded in 1989 and active until 1998, when it went bankrupt and sold its assets. It sent the world's first electronic cash payment over computer networks in 1994, according to the personal website of its founder, David Chaum.

The groundwork was laid in 1982 when David Chaum published an article titled, _Blind Signatures for Untraceable Payments_. Chaum's cryptography design, called _blind signatures_, are a means of achieving private, anonymous payments in which third parties cannot know the payer or payee, and yet proof of payment can still be verified and auditability is still possible.

In a very simple analogy, it would be like sending a letter to a bank containing two envelopes, one inside another. The outer envelope has a return address, whereas the internal one does not. The bank receives the package, opens the outer envelope, and signs the inner one (this of course would be unforgeable in using cryptographic digital signatures), returning it to the address on the outer envelope. The initial sender can then send the signed envelope to anyone at any time, meaning that the receiver knows the bank has verified this exchange, even though the bank cannot match up payer or payee, or time and amount that was sent. This is a simplification of the system, but it covers the basic principles as the system was altered somewhat for real use.

By 1995, Digicash's eCash was being tested throughout the world. Chaum's website boasts several vendors who accepted the currency, including Mosaic Software, the National Center for Supercomputing Applications in Illinois, and Warner Bros. Unfortunately, for very debateable reasons, the company ceased to exist in 1999 after it failed to attract enough users at either end of exchange - merchants or consumers - to continue to operate.

There are a few reasons offered for the demise of Digicash. Chiefly, many criticize David Chaum as a sort of "mad professor" who trusts no one, is extremely skeptical and suspicious of everyone else, and seemed to pull out of business deals and partnerships at the last minute, particularly with Visa and Microsoft founder and then-CEO, Bill Gates.<sup>2,3,4</sup> Of course, those same traits undoubtedly contributed to Chaum's dedicated life work to cryptography and especially anonymous, digital cash. Chaum himself believes they just did not market it effectively and were unable to explain to new internet users, who were not nearly as technically knowledgeable as the early pioneers, why privacy is important to them.

He told Forbes magazine in 1999: "It was hard to get enough merchants to accept it, so that you could get enough consumers to use it, or vice versa". Indeed, whether consumers need or want a system like this is a question unto itself. In that same Forbes article, the then Director of E-Commerce at Yahoo! said, "Do I see a need for a new currency? The answer would have to be no. No one's asking for it". Furthering the point, James Degracia, Visa's VP of e-commerce, said that "Visa is the digital cash" already. It is hard to say who is correct. As the old Henry Ford saying goes, "If I asked the people what they want, they would have said a faster horse".<sup>5</sup>

Ultimately, whatever the true reasons are for Digicash's failure, Satoshi Nakamoto would learn the lessons well. The personality problem, if one existed, is the subject of a cult of personality in which David Chaum as an entity seemed to hover largely over the whole plan, making it more about him than eCash (Digicash was the company, eCash the currency). We as humans love to focus on individuals. See how many people have tried to unmask Satoshi's identity. Whether or not David Chaum wanted it or sought it, the project would be inextricably linked to him as a person.

The reliance on traditional banking networks furthered the issue, as in reality they had very little eagerness to work with a digital cash company who could potentially take their customers. Instead, they partook mostly to hedge their bets. Perhaps this is why they are mostly slow to adapt to Bitcoin as well. Times are changing now in that regard. Nonetheless, it is obvious that Satoshi understood this and even tried to avoid publicity as much as possible in the early days. This is seen through his comment regarding Wikileaks' announcement that they will accept bitcoin for donations:

"I make this appeal to WikiLeaks not to try to use Bitcoin. Bitcoin is a small beta community in its infancy... It would have been nice to get this attention in any other context. Wikileaks has kicked the hornet's nest, and the swarm's headed towards us". <sup>6</sup>

Satoshi sent his last message a week later on December 12, 2010. "…I’m doing a quick build of what I have so far in case it’s needed, before venturing into more complex ideas".<sup>7</sup>

The last point is incredibly interesting: what do the people want? In true Cypherpunk fashion, Satoshi did not care. Satoshi Nakamoto wanted open, decentralized, peer-to-peer cash, so they created it. Whether or not people want it is up to them, but the fact is it now exists. Some may choose fiat, some may choose cryptocurrency, but the choice will be theirs. Saifedean Ammous, author of The Bitcoin Standard, said at a meetup in Toronto in July 2018, "Maybe Bitcoin just acts as a Batman-type figure that waits in the shadows of Gotham until bad monetary policy shows up".<sup>8</sup> People are rational: just like the automobile, they will change what they want if and when they see a superior offer.

## Hashcash

Dr. Adam Back created the hashcash system in 1997 as a means of stopping email spam, which was a major issue at the time as spammers learned how to use the internet and email. Essentially, one would be required to perform a mathematical calculation called a hash prior to sending an email. A hash function is a key part of Bitcoin's architecture as well. It is a one-way mathematical function that is very difficult to compute but very simple to verify as correct. For computers and digital files, hashes are used to reduce any size of information into a set number of bytes (depending on the specific hash function) that can be used to verify information. Since it is one-way, there is no shortcut formula to calculate the data that the hash represents: a computer must "brute force" it, meaning that it will keep trying combinations at random until it finds the correct solution. Dr. Back describes a hash function as "efficiently verifiable, but parameterisably expensive to compute" in the hashcash whitepaper.<sup>9</sup>

For hashcash, the server would hash an arbitrary string of characters, and the longer the string the more work would be required from the email sender's CPU since there are more potential variations to test. Think about a keypad requiring a 3 digit code to open a locked door. You do not know the code so you must try randomly. First you try "1-1-1", then "1-1-2" and so on until you find the right answer. To make this brute force process more difficult, the keypad could require 4 digits instead of 3. With longer values, the difficult grows exponentation (digits required ^ number of options).

You know you found the right answer because the door unlocked. You can prove to others you know the code by opening the door; you do not need to give others the code itself. In hashcash, you would know you found the right answer since your hash would equal the hash provided by the server. Once the sender's computer has found the correct "code", they will share the code as "proof of work". Since they could only have found that data through brute force, it proves a certain amount of effort was expended. Email spam is prevalent because it is cheap and easy; a hashcash system greatly increases the requirement to send an email, drastically lowering the incentive to spam.

Of course, hashcash does not seem like e-money in the same sense as bitcoin. However, the "proof of work" concept is vital to bitcoin mining, which secures the system. It has one currency-like quality in that it can be traded as a token to prove that some level of effort was put into its production. 

These proofs have a general fixed cost in that difficulty can be added by making the source data longer, but it is probabilistic in the sense that there is an element of luck. Compare it to lottery tickets: buying 100 tickets increases your chance over buying 1 ticket, but the 1 ticket could be the winner whereas the 100 may be losers. Change that to CPU power and the same logic applies. The more powerful computer will most likely, but necessarily, produce a "proof" faster.

In Bitcoin mining, transactions are grouped into blocks and a hash is produced. The network can measure the entire CPU power to adjust the difficulty of the hash solution automatically, with the calculation intending to take 10 minutes. Of course, due to luck, it could be 1 minute or 20. All the computers on the network compete to solve this problem, and once 1 computer on the network solves it, it broadcasts the "proof" to the other computers and is rewarded with newly minted bitcoins. These proofs are chained together so that anyone wishing to change the data will have to redo all the work that was done, which is prohibitively expensive. Plus, everyone has an incentive to work towards the next one so that they may be lucky enough to win the prize of new bitcoins. The combination of cryptography and economic incentive make the system extremely secure. This is only a partial explanation of bitcoin mining to help illustrate the concept of hashcash.

## Reusable Proof of Work

Hal Finney was a key player not only in the prelude to Bitcoin but also in the early development days. Indeed, he was the first to receive a transaction on the network from Satoshi Nakamoto.<sup>10</sup> His entry to the story is his work to build off Adam Back's hashcash. He wanted to make the "proof of work" (PoW) tokens reusable.

Since spam was an outgoing mail problem, there is no harm in allowing PoW tokens to be reused. That is, if Alice sent Bob an email with a PoW token, Bob could send an email to Charlie using that same PoW token, and so on. This creates a kind of pseudo payment network through email. This brilliant addition to Dr. Back's work laid a rough foundation for the payment network part of Bitcoin. Not only could we create tokens of value through CPU power, but we can also trade them later, so they retain their value.

The mechanism by which they are transferred is exactly the same as Bitcoin - the creator of the initial POW token signs a "transfer order" with another person's public key, thereby allowing them to be reused. Since this was designed as a means to reduce email spam, it requires the trust of the email server to validate token legitimacy. In Hal Finney's _World of RPOW_, he describes in depth what is required for scaling this solution for real-world practical use, even beyond email<sup>11</sup>. In his RPOW presentation, he presents potential use cases, including email spam and tokens for online poker games, and potential drawbacks, including the requirement to trust a central RPOW server and a lack of privacy.<sup>12,13</sup>

## Bit gold

Nick Szabo is a computer scientist and professor who has spent much of his career writing about digital money and digital contracts. He is considered one of the major influencers in the cryptocurrency space due to his longstanding interest and ground-breaking work. The term _smart contract_ was coined by him in a 1994 essay.<sup>14</sup> He cited the Cypherpunk mailing list in that essay as well, and was present on the mailing list.

Prior to the release of his Bit Gold idea, Szabo theorized a "distributed property title registry". At a high-level, the concept is not too dissimilar from Satoshi's blockchain concept. In it he described a mechanism for sharing records across parties with no mutual trust, through public, shared, replicated databases. It exists sort of like a rudimentary proof-of-stake blockchain, in that members hosting the shared database "vote" on its legitimacy, and "entry and exit fees should be low" to incentivize participation in the records network.<sup>15</sup>

He then theorized a digital money system in 1998 (then republished in 2005) remarkably similar to the one Satoshi Nakamoto delivered in 2008. Indeed, he is speculated to be Satoshi Nakamoto by some, though this is highly unlikely. His idea was to have computers produce PoW tokens that would be part of a public registry associated to a public encryption key. Whoever holds the associated private key (i.e., the mathematical proof of ownership) will be able to claim the token. Solutions would be linked to the previous solution to create a time-stamped link of new coins.<sup>16</sup>

This is almost exactly how Bitcoin operates. Of course, bit gold was just a theoretical system and never implemented, which adds to the allure of referring to Szabo as Satoshi. Further all the previous attempts at digital cash discussed here were referenced by Satoshi in the Bitcoin whitepaper except for Szabo.

One major difference between Szabo's idea and the eventual Bitcoin system is the economic theory. Szabo based it largely off gold from the perspective that it is scarce because of the work required to acquire it. Essentially, the value and difficulty will find an equilibrium but there is no set amount of PoW tokens to be created. Moore’s law, which defines the ever-increasing CPU power available, would threaten this system. Bitcoin is similar, however there is indeed a set number of bitcoins that will ever be created (21,000,000) and the minting of new coins is used as economic incentive to participate in the network.

In a July 2010 Bitcointalk forum post, Satoshi refers to Bitcoin as "an implementation of Wei Dai's bmoney and Nick Szabo's bit gold".<sup>17</sup>

## Bmoney

Wei Dai produced the bmoney idea in 1998. His whitepaper begins with "I am fascinated by Tim May's cryptoanarchy", showing the direct path of the cypherpunk ideals to digital currencies.<sup>18</sup> For a fun piece of history, Wei Dai initially announced _bmoney_ on the Cypherpunks mailing list, and shortly thereafter Adam Back sent an email to the list linking to its full text.<sup>19,20</sup>

Dai's idea as similar to that of Szabo: money is created by broadcasting the solution to an unsolved computational problem (as long as the CPU effort is verifiable). Sending money is similar, except one would broadcast "I pay 1 PoW token to you" and signs it with their cryptographic key, proving they own an address. If that address has 1 PoW token, the network will accept it. If it results in a negative balance, it will be ignored. This is similar to how Bitcoin operates.

One issue that Satoshi was able to resolve more elegantly was money creation. In the _bmoney_ text, Wei suggests using semi-trusted servers that will stake their own PoW tokens on the system that they will stand to lose for not validating new tokens or accepting transactions. This is currently known as Proof of Stake, in use by several popular blockchain networks today including Cosmos and soon, Ethereum, as opposed to Proof of Work used in Bitcoin.

Incredibly, given the similarities in the system, it does not seem that Satoshi Nakamoto was even aware of Dai's work until after he introduced Bitcoin and was tipped off to bmoney by none other than Adam Back. This is known through emails from Satoshi to both Adam Back and Wei Dai, dated August of 2008, months before Satoshi's public announcement of the Bitcoin whitepaper. Satoshi emailed Wei Dai, asking for the year of publication of his _bmoney_ proposal for citation purposes, and linked to an early draft of the Bitcoin paper, which interestingly did not include the name "Bitcoin" yet (it seems based on the link to an early draft provided by Satoshi, that the file name was "ecash.pdf"). Adam Back has not released his emails, but we can verify his statements in the correspondence between Wei Dai and Satoshi Nakamoto.<sup>21</sup>

## Ripplepay

Most followers of cryptocurrencies are aware of Ripple (XRP), and are likely surprised by its inclusion in this section. The pre-2012 Ripplepay peer-to-peer network _predates_ Bitcoin (having been released publicly in 2004).

Satoshi was aware of and thought the implementation of Ripplepay was "interesting".<sup>22</sup> Ripplepay was similar in architecture to the Lightning Network, connecting parties through various channels or hubs that would allow them to create financial transactions between them without a bank or government as an intermediary. The major difference between Lightning and Ripplepay is that where Lightning eliminates counterparty risk through the use of the Bitcoin blockchain as its layer one truth, Ripplepay still maintains this risk.<sup>23</sup> In real use, this would likely create unreliability in addition to a centralizing force that would gravitate to a few "trustworthy" banks.

Once Bitcoin came out, it became obvious that Bitcoin was a superior architecture. Ripplepay rebranded to Ripple (and briefly Opencoin, though with no relation to the Opencoin we will discuss next) in 2012 and attempted to recharacterize itself as a cryptocurrency, likely to capitalize on Bitcoin's success and growing popularity. At this stage, Ripple is not a decentralized currency in the same sense as Bitcoin, but the original peer-to-peer Ripplepay protocol deserves mention as a previous digital payment network prior to Bitcoin that Satoshi was definitely aware of.

## Opencoin

Opencoin is a "digital cash" program that attempted to implement the Chaumian idea of "blind signatures" discussed previously. It was also publicly released in 2008.<sup>24</sup> One of the founders of the project, Joerg Baach, conversed briefly with Satoshi on the P2P Research forum.<sup>25</sup> According to the GitHub repository, the final commit was made in 2015.<sup>26</sup>  

<sup>1</sup> _Adam Back on Satoshi Emails, Privacy Concerns, and Bitcoin's Early Days_, Cassio Gussan, January 20, 2020. [Retrieved online from cointelegraph.com.](https://cointelegraph.com/news/adam-back-on-satoshi-emails-privacy-concerns-and-bitcoins-early-days)  
<sup>2</sup> _How Digicash Blew Everything_. [Retrieved from cryptome.org.](https://cryptome.org/jya/digicrash.htm)  
<sup>3</sup> _3 Pre-Bitcoin Virtual Currencies that Bit The Dust_, Stan Higgins, November 30, 2014. [From CoinDesk.](https://www.coindesk.com/markets/2014/11/30/3-pre-bitcoin-virtual-currencies-that-bit-the-dust/)  
<sup>4</sup> _Electronic Cash for the Net Fails to Catch On_, Peter Wayner, November 28, 1998. [From New York Times archive.](https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/library/tech/98/11/cyber/articles/28cash.html)  
<sup>5</sup> _Requiem for a Bright Idea_, Julie Pitta, November 1, 1999. [Retrieved from forbes.com.](https://www.forbes.com/forbes/1999/1101/6411390a.html)  
<sup>6</sup> Satoshi forum post. [Retrieved from nakamotoinstitute.org.](https://satoshi.nakamotoinstitute.org/posts/bitcointalk/523/)  
<sup>7</sup> Satoshi's last forum post. [Retrieved from nakamotoinstitute.org.](https://satoshi.nakamotoinstitute.org/posts/bitcointalk/543/)  
<sup>8</sup> Presenter, Safidean Ammous. _The Bitcoin Standard_ meetup, July 2018.  
<sup>9</sup> _Hashcash_, Adam Back, August 1, 2002 (originally published in May 1997). [Retrieved from hashcash.org.](http://hashcash.org/papers/hashcash.pdf)  
<sup>10</sup> _The First Bitcoin Transaction Was Sent to Hal Finney 12 Years Ago_, Shaurya Malwa, January 12, 2021.  
<sup>11</sup> _World of RPOW_, Hal Finney. [Retrieved from Nakamoto Institute's Hal Finney archive, here.](https://nakamotoinstitute.org/finney/rpow/world.html)  
<sup>12</sup> _RPOW Slides_, Hal Finney. [Retrieved from Nakamoto Institute's Hal Finney archive, here.](https://nakamotoinstitute.org/finney/rpow/slides)  
<sup>13</sup> _RPOW FAQs_, Hal Finney. [Retrieved from Nakamoto Institute's Hal Finney archive, here.](https://nakamotoinstitute.org/finney/rpow/faqs.html)  
<sup>14</sup> _Smart Contracts_, Nick Szabo, 1994. [Retrieved from the University of Amsterdam's archive here.](https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/CDROM/Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.vwh.net/smart.contracts.html)  
<sup>15</sup> _Secure Property Titles With Owner Authority_, Nick Szabo, 1998. [Retrieved from the Nakamoto Insititute archive, here.](https://nakamotoinstitute.org/secure-property-titles/)  
<sup>16</sup> _Bit Gold: Towards Trust-Idependent Digital Money_, Nick Szabo, 1999. [Original article retrieved from archive.org here.](https://web.archive.org/web/20140406003811/http://szabo.best.vwh.net/bitgold.html)  
<sup>17</sup> Satoshi Nakamoto, July 20, 2010. [Retrieved from Bitcointalk.org forum, available here.](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=342.msg4508#msg4508)  
<sup>18</sup> _Bmoney_, Wei Dai, 1998 (no exact date). [Retrieved from weidai.com here.](http://www.weidai.com/bmoney.txt)  
<sup>19</sup> Wei Dai email to Cypherpunks mailing list on November 27, 1998. [Retrieved from venona.com archive of Cypherpunks mailing list here.](http://cypherpunks.venona.com/date/1998/11/msg00941.html)  
<sup>20</sup> _Wei Dai's "bmoney" protocol_, Adam Back, December 5, 1998. [Retrieved from venona.com archive of Cypherpunks mailing list here.](https://cypherpunks.venona.com/date/1998/12/msg00194.html)  
<sup>21</sup> Wei Dai and Satoshi Nakamoto email exchange on August 22, 2008. [Retrieved from the bitcoin.com Satoshi email archive here.](https://www.bitcoin.com/satoshi-archive/emails/wei-dai/1/)  
<sup>22</sup> Satoshi commented on the (pre-XRP token) Ripple concept on 2 occasions. First, in February 13, 2009, in response to questions after Satoshi posted the announcement of Bitcoin to the P2P Research mailing list. Satoshi said, "As trust systems go, Ripple is unique in spreading trust around rather than concentrating it". Then again in April 2009, in emails with Mike Hearn: "Ripple is interesting in that it's the only other system that does something with trust besides concentrate it into a central server". [Retrieved from Bitcoin.com's Satoshi archive here.](https://www.bitcoin.com/satoshi-archive)  
<sup>23</sup> _The Ripple Story_, Bitmex Research, February 6, 2018. [Available on bitmex.com here.](https://blog.bitmex.com/the-ripple-story)  
<sup>24</sup> From the description on the opencoin.org website. [opencoin.org.](opencoin.org)  
<sup>25</sup> As seen on the P2P Resarch forum. [Retrieved from the archive on ning.com here.](http://p2pfoundation.ning.com/forum/topics/bitcoin-open-source?id=2003008%3ATopic%3A9402&page=1#comments)  
<sup>26</sup> Based on the commits on the opencoin Github repository, [found on Github here.](https://github.com/OpenCoin)  